Once around, the moons of Mars.
So, the moons of Mars were first
discovered by Asaf Hall, an astronomer
based at the US Naval Observatory in
Washington DC. originally located in
Foggy Bottom before it was then moved in
the 1890s and uh that was due to the
expansion of the city but also the fact
that uh as the name suggests the fog
wasn't great for astronomy but in the
month of August 1877 Mars was at its
closest approach. The Earth was
overtaking it on the inside. So it was
just over 35 million miles away. That's
about as close as it gets. And of
course, it's much more visible,
brighter, and shows a larger disc at
that time. So, Hall was having a look,
and on the
11th, 12th of August, he was able to
spot a tiny little dot and he could note
the movement from hour to hour and
indeed from night to night. Then it
became foggy and the weather wasn't uh
playing very nicely. But on the 17th he
was able to go out and do further
observations looking to see if he could
relocate this uh little moon which we
now call Deeos and he found a second one
much closer into Mars on the nights of
the 17th and again on the 18th thus
discovering the pair of them. Now we
call them Phobos and Deemos. The names
are the Greek for fear and panic or
fright, terror and dread respectively.
And these names were suggested by a
school master Henry Madden who was
master of
uh science at Eaton and he had obviously
been acquainted with Homer's Iliad where
the god of war Aries summons fear and
fright. And so he chose those names in
the Greek. The original spelling was
Phobos spelled P H O B U S and Demos D E
I M U S. But those have been changed now
to the spellings that you see at the top
of the screen. And of course, Mars is
the Roman name for the Greek god of war,
Aries.
So very sensibly chosen. Now, in a in a
curious coincidence, Madden was in fact
the great uncle of Venicia Bernie, who
also suggested the name of Pluto for
Planet X when that was discovered.
But there's a curious twist to this
tale. Going back to Galileo, when
Galileo observed Saturn, he noted
something strange about it, and he
reported that he saw it as a triple
form. What he'd seen was the rings
either side of the main body of the
planet. And Galileo being concerned to
make sure he recorded his discoveries
and protected them until he was
absolutely sure had a habit of
publishing them as an anagram. And you
can see the great long string of letters
which I'm not going to attempt to read
out there which is his anagram.
And what it boils down to is that he
said, "I have observed the most distant
planet to have a triple form."
Now, the reason for the anagram is to
protect the discovery so that it's not
immediately claimable by somebody else
um and delays the unveiling of the true
nature of the discovery. Quite an
interesting trick actually.
Now, Johannes Kepler, also a great
famous astronomer, misinterpreted that
anagram and translated it as Salvistrium
Geminatum Martian Ples, which translates
as hello furious twins, sons of Mars,
suggesting that Galileo's discovery was
in fact a pair of Martian moons. So uh
completely wrong actually but uh a
curious twist in the story
and this goes on into the fact that in
1726 when Jonathan Swift wrote the book
Gulivver's travels he describes in it
the Leutin astronomers using telescopes
and observing two moons of Mars and he
even goes on to talk about the fact that
the orbits were just 10 and 21.5 hours.
Now, in fact, that's awfully close to
the truth. There are indeed two moons
and they orbit in 7.6 and 30 hours. So,
not quite the same, but in the sort of
ballpark really. Now, it's possible that
he based this on having heard of
Kepler's interpretation of Galileo, uh
thus compounding the uh error really.
Now, um, it also fits with a sort of
pattern that was being observed where
Earth had one moon and Jupiter had four
at the time, also discovered by Galileo.
And so, it naturally fitted in sequence
that perhaps Mars should have two in
some sort of uh, following of a harmonic
relationship, the music of the spheres
kicking in.
Voltater also wrote a short story
Micromeas in 1752 and in it talks about
alien visitors to Earth and mentions the
moons of Mars. Now he was perhaps also
influenced by the writings of Swift. So,
a third generation of this uh tale of
these moons, but you'll notice that all
of these dates are well over a hundred
years before Asaf Hall actually is
recorded of observing them. So, uh quite
an interesting twist. It goes on into
the 20th century. Russian astronomer
Permin
and a designer of spacecraft to Mars and
Venus for the Soviet Union
got hold of the tail from Swift and
claims that Swift had deciphered records
that the Martians had left behind on
Earth. So following that theme through,
well, yeah, not true. It all really goes
back to that misinterpretation
of uh Kepler's.
But nevertheless,
Swift and Voltater are both honored with
craters named after them on Demos. And a
couple of regions on Phobos are bearing
the names of the Lagoda Platitia and
Lapuda Lio um from the names of
locations in the book Gulivver's
Travels. Now, these two moons, they
really are tiny. This image here is to
scale. Mars is the correct size. The
moons are the correct size relative to
it. The two tiny little dots which you
can only just make out. Perhaps you
can't even see them. And uh the distance
between them is identical. So we won't
compare it against Mars. Let's compare
it against the moon, something we're
more familiar with. And there they are
to scale. Phobos and Deemos. incredibly
tiny little objects indeed. No wonder it
was uh quite difficult to find them. But
from the surface of Mars itself, they
would look rather larger. We have the
our moon viewed from the Earth on the
right hand side. And then we have Phobos
and Deemos, the two moons of Mars to the
size that they would appear as viewed
from the planet itself. looking up from
Mars. And of course, they look so much
larger because they are in very close
orbits. Got a little animation here of
the orbits of Phobos and Deemos around
Mars. And Mars is drawn at the correct
scale there. So, you can see Mo Phobos,
the inner one, orbits Mars. It's uh got
an orbital radius of just over 9,400
kilometers and takes just under eight
hours, 7 hours 39 minutes to go around.
Demos further away, 23,400
km and just over 30 hours. But you can
see that actually Phobos's orbit is only
a little bit larger than the planet Mars
itself. I think the gap between Phobos
and Mars is just over the diameter of
Mars. So, these are very low orbits.
It's actually makes Phobos the moon that
orbits closest to its parent planet that
we actually know of.
Now, this is a fantastic photograph of
Phobos over the uh surface of Mars there
with a little bit of atmosphere showing
as well. Mars rotates in just over 24
hours. It's 24 hours and 38 minutes. And
Phobos in 7 hours 39 minutes. And as a
result, if you were on the surface of
Mars, you would see Phobos rise in the
west going the wrong way across the sky.
Much as we see the International Space
Station,
rise in the west, travel across the sky,
and set in the east. In fact, because it
is orbiting around the Earth every 90
minutes, well, Phobos a little bit
slower, just under 8 hours, but it would
nevertheless rise, traverse the sky,
set, and then in a in the course of a
single day or a single night, it would
come up again and do it for a second
time across the sky. Um, again, we see
that with the International Space
Station, of course. So, very curious.
Deemos on the other hand orbits more
slowly than Mars rotates um in 30 hours
but that would mean it would kind of
hang in the sky uh and move rather
slowly.
Now the orbit of Phobos is also strange
because it is shrinking. It's declining
by 2 cm a year. This is down to tidal
drag. The gravity of little Phobos
manages to raise tides on Mars. Of
course, there's no liquid ocean on Mars
at the moment, but it raises a tidal
bulge, a tiny one in the rocks of Mars,
and that bulge lags behind Phobos.
Phobos orbiting round so rapidly that it
gets ahead of the bulge that it's
raising all the time. And then that
bulge actually creating that slight
asymmetry in Mars causes gravity of its
own to be slightly stronger in the
direction of the bulge and that pulls
back a little bit breaking the uh
progress of Phobos in its orbit and
causing the orbit to decay.
We get the opposite effect with our moon
because it's orbiting so slowly. It
takes a month, 28 days to go around. And
obviously the Earth is spinning in 24
hours. And so the bulge that the moon
creates, quite a bit larger bulge in
this instance on the surface of the
earth, including the liquid in the
ocean, the tides,
that creates a tidal pull, slowing the
rotation of the earth, but causing our
moon to spiral outwards. And in the same
way, Deemos spirals outwards because it
is beyond the synchronous orbit. The
orbit that we use for our geostationary
satellites where they orbital period is
exactly 24 hours, the so-called Clark
belt where we put all our comm's
satellites for satellite TV and so on.
Um they appear from the surface of the
earth just sit in one place because we
spin in 24 hours and so do they. Well,
Phobos is interior to that in a closer
orbit, and therefore it uh leads the
tidal drag, the tidal bulge, and spirals
in. Phobos is in a 30-hour orbit just
beyond the synchronous orbit of Mars and
spirals outwards as a result, as does
our moon. So, in around 50 million
years, Phobos is in trouble. It will
either spiral in and crash into the
surface of Mars or perhaps before it
does that it will cross what's called
the rash limit which is where the tidal
stress induced in
uh the constituents of Phobos caused by
Mars's gravity will tear it apart. What
happens is that the near side of the
moon will be attracted more strongly
than the far side. And so this gradually
squeezes the moon into an elliptical
shape and eventually tears it apart.
So Phobos is doomed in some faristant
future 50 million years from now. So
another fantastic image of Phobos. This
is showing it in its gray form. It is
really a very very dark object. It's the
larger of the two here shown with the
color slightly enhanced to give you that
uh brown color. And you can see that
it's fairly round but not perfectly
spherical 26x 23x 18 km.
Uh you've got the mass there 10 16 kg
and a density of around 1.9 g per cm.
Now, that's interesting. That's more
dense than water or ice, which would be
one, but considerably less dense than
rock. And so, it suggests that there is
uh quite a lot of gaps, voids inside
Phobos. If it's of rocky and icy
composition, the uh total volume would
need to have about 30% of voids inside
it, making it a rubble pile rather than
a solid object. Um, and that has
interesting consequences for our
understanding of where Phobos may have
come from. I said it was very dark in
color. You can see it quite brightly in
this image which has been enhanced. But
only 7% of the light reflects off
Phobos. So that's very very dark in
color indeed. And this is because it is
rich in carbon. That also contributes to
that low density. And that carbon nature
points perhaps towards it being similar,
you might think, to carbonacious
condrites. the uh meteors that uh become
meteorites when they land on the surface
of the earth and we pick them up. And
there is possibly one meteorite in the
world's collection which may be a
fragment of Phobos. We're not sure.
Temperature, well, it's chilly out
there. Minus4 in sunlight and minus 112
on the night side of Phobos. Uh there is
obviously no atmosphere around such a
small body to provide any sort of
greenhouse warming or anything. This is
just the direct heat of the sun.
One of the strange features that was
discovered when a few of the visiting
space probes flew past and photographed
Phobos up close was the grooves. You can
see these strange grooves running across
the surface there and they appear to
emanate from the rim of the large crater
on the nose of Phobos there. Uh that's
called Stiknney and it's six miles
across. So uh that's a considerable
fraction of the diameter of Phobos and
uh as a result almost large enough that
it might have risked shattering Phobos
into fragments when the impact occurred.
That crater Stikney um is named after
Asaf Hall's wife Angelene Stikney. Um
very appropriate I think. She was
instrumental in encouraging him to go
and conduct the observations and the
search for the the moons because he was
indeed searching for the possibility
that there might be moons rather than
just finding them by accident um when
observing the planet itself.
Now you can see the grooves coming and
they don't all come directly from the uh
crater. Some of them are at angles and
we think that this is either fragments
that were ejected by the impact falling
back onto the nose of Phobos and then
bouncing and rolling down away from the
crater edge or that this is actually um
other material in orbit around Mars that
is hitting from that direction because
Phobos is tidily locked. It keeps one
face towards Mars and in fact the
Stikney crater points forwards along its
orbit. And so any material in and around
the near Martian space, any debris left
over is going to get to strike Phobos
from around this region. And so perhaps
that's what we're seeing with the
grooves. Uh there is a bit of a mystery
to the color though. Most of Phobos is
that sort of reddish brown color which
we also associate with Mars. Uh very
dark in in overall color though very
dark in overall brightness. But the
lighter regions that seem to have been
exposed by these impactors, whatever
they are, fragments of Phobos or other
fragments in orbit around Mars, have
kicked up this lighter, bluer material.
And uh that's sort of fresh and
unexposed material that's been brought
to the surface perhaps. Um and we don't
really understand what that's made of.
Now there are some interesting little
stories around and about Phobos itself.
One of them is the Phobos monolith. You
can see the object with the long thin
shadow just left of center there. This
is uh supposed to be a monolith
obviously harking back to Arthur C.
Clark's 2001 of Space Odyssey and the
large rectangular monolith on the moon.
Um and people have come up with all
kinds of conspiracy theories around this
observation.
We can look at it in a couple of other
images here and zoom right in. And now
when you you zoom right in, it starts to
look a little bit less rectangular, but
it does seem to have a very long shadow.
And that's why people think it is this
tall, thin object. Well, it doesn't.
That shadow is actually long because the
ground where the shadow is is a steep
downward slope. And so when this
photograph was taken, you get the effect
of a very very long shadow compared to
the shadow of some of the other objects,
not because the object is tall, but
because the ground is sloping away from
it downhill. So I'm afraid there is no
monolith there to be found.
1959 there was a hoax about Phobos, an
April Fool's joke by Walter Scott
Houston, rather famous amateur
astronomer and author. And that's a
photograph of him there and his book
Deep Sky Wonders. Um and uh he used to
write for various journals and in
particular the journal of the great
plains Observer, the journal of the
astronomy club in that region. And he
put in there in April, April the 1st, an
April Fool's joke, a quote saying, "Dr.
Arthur Hail of the University of the
Sierras reports that the moons of Mars
are actually artificial satellites."
Now, it was a joke and neither that
university nor Dr. Hail ever existed.
So, um people should have had a chance
to spot that.
But it started a bit of a run of stories
as Professor Joseph Schilofski
based at the university in Moscow, a
very successful medalinning astronomer
used estimates of Phobos's spiraling
orbit
to
try to derive its density and therefore
model its interior. And he concluded
that one of the possibilities, not the
only possibility, was that Phobos was in
fact hollow and made out of a metal
shell. And this of course triggered an
entire conspiracy theory about Phobos
being an artificial alien spacecraft
parked in orbit around Mars and slowly
decaying as uh the uh machine had become
broken and the aliens were doomed. They
were going to orbit Mars forever and
then crash into the surface.
Well,
this was wrong. It's based on an
overestimate that uh Phobos is spiraling
in at five cmters a year and the correct
value is two. And uh if you redo that
then you get a lower density and you get
the model that we have today of an icy
rocky body with voids within it rather
than an alien spaceship.
Now I've got a nice little animation
here. This is Phobos
crossing the face of the sun imaged from
the surface of Mars. And you can see the
shape of Phobos not being perfectly
round as it goes in front of the disc of
the sun creating an annular eclipse
almost. Um it obviously does that quite
rapidly because it's uh orbit only takes
just under eight hours to go right
round. And we have another little
animation this time taken by the probe
Curiosity from the surface of Mars
viewing the two moons. So Phobos there
moving leftwards
is on its traverse of the sky from west
to east. And now appearing behind it
again there is Deemos. So that was
Phobos occultting Deemos. An occultation
is where one body blocks your line of
sight to the other, rendering it
invisible.
So, what about Demos itself? Well, it's
fairly similar to Phobos. Here's a
lovely image of it. And um you can see
one thing about it already, which is
that it's rather smooth. It is the
smaller of the two. still quite
irregular in shape, 12x 10x 16 km, lower
mass than Phobos quite considerably, and
a density of a bit less, 1.5 g per cubic
cm. But again, that same brownish hue to
it with the lighter parts with a slight
blue tint. Um, there is something
different about them though, the
smoothness, um, and the lack of craters.
So it seems that Deeos has had fewer
impacts.
Again, rocky, rich in carbon, similar to
sea type asteroids.
And again, I've got a lovely little
photograph taken from the surface of
Mars of Deemos trans uh transiting in
front of the sun here, creating a mini
eclipse.
So we have these two moons. Where though
did they come from? And there are two
fundamentally different ideas to this.
One is that they were captured objects.
Captured from asteroids in the asteroid
main belt, perhaps perturbed by other
near misses coming too close to Mars and
being trapped in orbit around it, either
separately or perhaps as a binary object
where the two were in orbit around each
other and they happened to come close to
Mars. and that binary
uh object breakup being split up by the
influence of Mars's gravity into their
current orbits. That's definitely a
possibility. Um the chance that the two
of them independently wandered in and
were captured into their present orbits
seems less likely.
or they could have been formed in orbit
around Mars either at the same time as
Mars out of the same uh grouping and
collapse of dis of material that formed
the planet or perhaps they formed in
orbit around Mars later on.
So let's have a look at these ideas.
Well, capture is interesting. The idea
that you capture a pair of asteroids
either separately or together into orbit
around the planet is possible, but they
could have come from almost any approach
to Mars. And you would expect that that
would lead to a completely random
orientation of the orbits. they would be
inclined or even retrograde going the
wrong way around the planet as is the
case for the moon Triton which orbits
around Neptune which was probably was a
captured body.
Um so the capture of them into these
perfectly circular orbits around the
equator of Mars and really quite close
to Mars does seem to be problematic for
this theory. It's not impossible that
they're captured asteroids. And
actually, most text books and uh videos
talk about them as indeed captured
asteroids. But what about the other
ideas? Well, perhaps they formed in
place from a dis of debris, either the
primordial one out which Mars was
created or from a later set of rings
around Mars.
How can we tell the difference?
Well, one factor is the density. The
density of Phobos at 1.88 g per cubic cm
with 30% voids and that rubble pile
structure is just wrong. It's just not
what you get for the density of
asteroids. It doesn't fit. They are
generally more dense objects. and the
spectrum sh
when we look at the light from uh either
Phobos or Deemos doesn't fit the brown
areas in particular the majority of the
bodies show the presence of minerals
called phosyicates
and we don't get those on asteroids but
they are well known on the surface of
Mars itself and they are formed usually
in the presence of water. This is one of
the clues to the wetter past and the per
probable existence of oceans on the
surface of Mars for its first billion
billion and a half years or so. And so
these do not point to the origin as
captured asteroids.
But there is that bluish material around
the crater sticky there that we just
don't quite understand. Um although
there are some ideas.
So where could they have come from if
they're not captured? Well, one idea is
that Mars once suffered a giant impact,
as is the case probably with the Earth's
moon being formed by the impact of a
large Mars-sized object called Thea
smashing into the Earth in the early
days of the solar system, creating a
ring of debris and the moon forming out
of it. And that may well have been the
case on Mars. Mars may have been struck
and formed rings and those rings
condensing into moons perhaps in only
10,000 years. That's all it takes for a
set of rings to coalesce to form moons.
And we estimate that perhaps the
impactor here was really quite small. So
something the size of series, the large
asteroid, the largest asteroid that
remains, or perhaps even smaller.
Certainly less than about 3% of the mass
of Mars. So, not the giant impact that
uh we saw with Earth with a really huge
body striking it, but a rather smaller
asteroid smashing into Mars or a
planetal um in its own orbit that
happened to come too close to Mars.
And if that body was made of ice, maybe
that delivered a lot of water to Mars
back in the early days and could also
account for that uh creation of those
minerals, the phosilicates.
So that impactor could have come from
just the asteroid belt or it could have
come from deep space. It could have been
from the Kiper belt. um a large cometry
body coming in from the UT cloud or even
one of these interstellar visitors like
Umua Mua Borisov or Atlas that we have
discovered coming in from deep space and
uh striking Mars and we think that
that's one of those possibilities is
quite likely because we can't really
account for where all the water came
from otherwise. So an icy body from the
outer reaches seems possible.
Now Mars has seen many impacts. I just
love this image of the surface of Mars.
It's a laser radar altimeter map. So
it's measuring the height above or below
the average level. And blue is a deep
hole. So we have the Helas basin in the
just right of center there deep below
the Martian average. And we have the uh
higher ground green, yellow, orange,
red, and the tips of the volcanoes in
white there on the Tharsus plateau over
to the left hand side of the image. And
you can see that the top part of the map
is very smooth. There are some craters,
but nowhere near as many as there are to
the lower part. And that is the Borealis
basin and probably used to be the
northern ocean of Mars with the Martian
Grand Canyon Maris Aalis Marinaris
flowing with water from the volcano Thus
plateau out and delivering the water
back to that ocean in a active weather
cycle a billion years or so into the
history of Mars. But now for the last 2
billion maybe 3 billion years Mars has
dried out. So this impact would have
been very early on that created things
like the Helas basin the and uh the
other impacts that you can clearly see
and an enormous impact that hollowed out
the Borealis basin. that northern ocean
region of Mars is probably lowlying
because of an impact, but we're not
absolutely certain of that. But these
large impacts, whether it was the
Borealis Basin or the Helas Basin,
ejecting huge amounts of material into
orbit, could well have created rings and
then moons and moonlets around Mars.
And one set of simulations suggests that
Mars once had three moons. One
considerably larger but rather transient
moon plus Phobos and Deemos as shown
here. So initially the ejector from an
impact on Mars threw the material up
much of it coalesed to form a large
third moon and then ripples in the disc
in the top diagram there coalesed to
form Phobos and Deemos in their existing
orbits or at least approximately so
they've obviously been spiraling inwards
in the case of Phobos. The transient
moon would have spiraled inwards even
faster and smashed into Mars again or
been broken up by the rash limit, the
tidal forces um and then all the
fragments would have fallen into Mars.
Deemos we think may have spiraled in for
a while and then tidal interactions
between Mars and its companions here
would have sent it back further out.
So possibly three moons
or indeed many. And this is often the
case with discussions around Saturn and
Saturn's rings. And every time I look,
Saturn is reported to have yet more
moons. It was well over 200. Last time I
looked, when I was a lad, there were
nine. Um, but it's a question of where
you draw the line between ring particle
and moon. And so with the formation of
moons, you would have got moons and
moonlets and rings and ring particles.
And maybe Phobos and Demos are just the
last survivors, the two remaining
objects in orbit around Mars. Or maybe
we haven't found them all yet.
But another theory is that there was
once one larger moon created in a
similar way with the giant impact
forming a ring forming a moon as we have
and that that moon would have swept up
and collected up all of the smaller
moonlets. A process that we also think
happened with the Earth's moon. We
probably had many moons um at one stage
for a short while before
our current moon ended up as the
surviving predator eating all the
others. And that may have happened at
Mars as well. And then there are some
simulations that suggest that
um that parent moon became disrupted
forming Phobos and Deemos.
And the idea is that if you run the
orbits of Phomos and Deemos and their
orbital evolution backwards using
simulations in a computer, then
somewhere around 2 billion years ago,
those two orbits would have been such
that the two moons crossed paths.
And that could mean that that was where
they came from. that crossing event
wasn't really a crossing event, but was
their origin
as fragments of a larger parent moon
being disrupted.
Now, that's all well and good, but the
simulations can also be run to show that
those two moons would have then
potentially collided with each other
again by now if this had been the
scenario. So, we don't know. We don't
know.
Now,
many space missions have been talked
about and many have been sent out
towards Mars, but some have been
proposed targeting the moons of Mars
themselves,
including robots and humans even landing
on Phobos. For some reason, Phobos is
always the uh target of choice. Perhaps
because Deeos is so small that a human
could jump off the surface. The gravity
of it being so low, you'd only have to
do 5.6 m/ second to have escape velocity
from Deemos. Um, so perhaps you want a
little bit more gravity to hold your
spacecraft down. And the mission that
I'm particularly interested in at the
moment is a Japanese one called MMX,
which is the Martian Moons Explorer,
which is targeting to land a robot on
Phobos, setting off next year, 2026,
and with it landing on Phobos and then
grabbing samples and returning to
deliver them back to Earth in 2031. So,
we might actually be able to understand
Phobos better having retrieved these
samples. We might even be able to figure
out if that meteorite is really from
Phobos or not. Um, so it'll solve at
least one question, perhaps many. Uh,
but I'm sure it will raise more as we go
forward. And so rather than thinking of
Phobos and Deemos as just a couple of
little tiny captured asteroids, I think
we should really give them a little bit
more attention. And I'd love to see some
spacecraft going and actually landing
and bringing those samples back. And so
that's it for this one. Thanks very much
for listening and I'll see you in
another video.